# Fit linear model for element-wise data

\`ModelArray.lm\` fits linear model (\`stats::lm()\`) for each of
elements requested, and returns a tibble dataframe of requested model
statistics.

## Usage

``` r
ModelArray.lm(
  formula,
  data,
  phenotypes,
  scalar,
  element.subset = NULL,
  full.outputs = FALSE,
  var.terms = c("estimate", "statistic", "p.value"),
  var.model = c("adj.r.squared", "p.value"),
  correct.p.value.terms = c("fdr"),
  correct.p.value.model = c("fdr"),
  num.subj.lthr.abs = 10,
  num.subj.lthr.rel = 0.2,
  verbose = TRUE,
  pbar = TRUE,
  n_cores = 1,
  on_error = "stop",
  write_results_name = NULL,
  write_results_file = NULL,
  write_results_flush_every = 1000L,
  write_results_storage_mode = "double",
  write_results_compression_level = 4L,
  return_output = TRUE,
  ...
)
```

## Arguments

- formula:

  Formula (passed to \`stats::lm()\`)

- data:

  ModelArray class

- phenotypes:

  A data.frame of the cohort with columns of independent variables and
  covariates to be added to the model. It should contains a column
  called "source_file", and this column should match to that in `data`.

- scalar:

  A character. The name of the element-wise scalar to be analysed

- element.subset:

  A list of positive integers (min = 1, max = number of elements). The
  subset of elements you want to run. Default is \`NULL\`, i.e.
  requesting all elements in \`data\`.

- full.outputs:

  TRUE or FALSE, Whether to return full set of outputs. If FALSE, it
  will only return those requested in arguments `var.*` and
  `correct.p.value.*`; if TRUE, arguments `var.*` will be ignored, and
  will return all possible statistics for `var.*` and any options
  requested in arguments `correct.p.value.*`.

- var.terms:

  A list of characters. The list of variables to save for terms (got
  from \`broom::tidy()\`). See "Details" section for more.

- var.model:

  A list of characters. The list of variables to save for the model (got
  from \`broom::glance()\`). See "Details" section for more.

- correct.p.value.terms:

  A list of characters. To perform and add a column for p.value
  correction for each term. Default: "fdr". See "Details" section for
  more.

- correct.p.value.model:

  A list of characters. To perform and add a column for p.value
  correction for the model. Default: "fdr". See "Details" section for
  more.

- num.subj.lthr.abs:

  An integer, lower threshold of absolute number of subjects. For an
  element, if number of subjects who have finite values (defined by
  \`is.finite()\`, i.e. not NaN or NA or Inf) in h5 file \>
  `num.subj.lthr.abs`, then this element will be run normally;
  otherwise, this element will be skipped and statistical outputs will
  be set as NaN. Default is 10.

- num.subj.lthr.rel:

  A value between 0-1, lower threshold of relative number of subjects.
  Similar to `num.subj.lthr.abs`, if proportion of subjects who have
  valid value \> `num.subj.lthr.rel`, then this element will be run
  normally; otherwise, this element will be skipped and statistical
  outputs will be set as NaN. Default is 0.2.

- verbose:

  TRUE or FALSE, to print verbose message or not

- pbar:

  TRUE or FALSE, to print progress bar or not

- n_cores:

  Positive integer, The number of CPU cores to run with

- on_error:

  Character: one of "stop", "skip", or "debug". When an error occurs
  while fitting an element, choose whether to stop, skip returning
  all-NaN values for that element, or drop into \`browser()\` (if
  interactive) then skip. Default: "stop".

- write_results_name:

  Optional analysis name for incremental writes to
  \`results/\<write_results_name\>/results_matrix\`.

- write_results_file:

  Optional HDF5 file path used when \`write_results_name\` is provided.

- write_results_flush_every:

  Positive integer number of elements per write block.

- write_results_storage_mode:

  Storage mode for results writes (e.g., \`"double"\`).

- write_results_compression_level:

  Gzip compression level (0-9) for results writes.

- return_output:

  If TRUE (default), return the combined data.frame. If FALSE, returns
  \`invisible(NULL)\`; useful for streaming large runs to HDF5.

- ...:

  Additional arguments for \`stats::lm()\`

## Value

Tibble with the summarized model statistics for all elements requested
when \`return_output = TRUE\`; otherwise \`invisible(NULL)\`.

## Details

You may request returning specific statistical variables by setting
`var.*`, or you can get all by setting `full.outputs=TRUE`. Note that
statistics covered by `full.outputs` or `var.*` are the ones from
broom::tidy() and broom::glance() only, and do not include corrected
p-values. However FDR-corrected p-values ("fdr") are generated by
default. List of acceptable statistic names for each of `var.*`:

- `var.terms`: c("estimate","std.error","statistic","p.value"); For
  interpretation please see
  [tidy.lm](https://broom.tidymodels.org/reference/tidy.lm.html).

- `var.model`: c("r.squared", "adj.r.squared", "sigma", "statistic",
  "p.value", "df", "logLik", "AIC", "BIC", "deviance", "df.residual",
  "nobs"); For interpretation please see
  [glance.lm](https://broom.tidymodels.org/reference/glance.lm.html).

For p-value corrections (arguments `correct.p.value.*`), supported
methods include all methods in \`p.adjust.methods\` except "none". Can
be more than one method. FDR-corrected p-values ("fdr") are calculated
by default. Turn it off by setting to "none".  
Arguments `num.subj.lthr.abs` and `num.subj.lthr.rel` are mainly for
input data with subject-specific masks, i.e. currently only for volume
data. For fixel-wise data, you may ignore these arguments.
